# October 17, 1994 {#week41}

In the beginning of September I went to a conference at the Center for
Gravitational Physics and Geometry at Penn State. This is the center run
by Abhay Ashtekar, and it has Jorge Pullin and Lee Smolin as faculty,
and Roger Penrose as a part-time visitor --- so it's a great place to
visit if you're interested in quantum gravity. There are a lot of good
postdocs and such there, too. I've been too busy to say much so far
about what happened at this conference, but I'd like to now.

One talk I enjoyed a lot was Steve Carlip's, on the entropy of black
holes. This has subsequently come out as a preprint, available
electronically:

1) "The Statistical Mechanics of the (2+1)-Dimensional Black Hole", by Steve Carlip, 12 pages available as [`gr-qc/9409052`](https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9409052).

It's well-known by know that in certain situations it makes sense to
speak of the "entropy" of a black hole, but the real meaning of this
entropy is still mysterious. In particular, since the entropy of a black
hole is (often, but not always) proportional to the area of its event
horizon, it would be very satisfying if the entropy corresponded somehow
to degrees of freedom that "lived at the event horizon". Steve Carlip
has done a pretty credible calculation along these lines (though not
without various subtle difficulties) in the case of a black hole in
3-dimensional spacetime.

I should say a little bit about gravity in 3 dimensions and why people
are interested in it. $3$-dimensional gravity is drastically simpler than
4-dimensional gravity, since in 3 dimensions the vacuum Einstein's
equations say the spacetime metric is *flat*, at least if the
cosmological constant vanishes. Thus there can be no gravitational
radiation (and in quantum theory no "gravitons"), and the metric
produced by a static point mass is not like the Schwarschild metric,
instead, on space it is just like that of a cone. Things are a bit
different if the cosmological constant is nonzero; in particular, there
are black-hole type solutions. But there is still no gravitational
radiation.

Basically, people are interested in $3$-dimensional quantum gravity
because it's simple enough that one can compute something and hope it
sheds some light on the $4$-dimensional world we live in. For some issues
this appears to be the case: primarily, conceptual issues having to do
with theories in which there is no "background metric". Unfortunately,
there are SEVERAL DIFFERENT WAYS to set up $3$-dimensional quantum
gravity, corresponding to different approaches people have to
4-dimensional quantum gravity. For this, check out Carlip's paper "Six
ways to quantize (2+1)-dimensional gravity," mentioned in
["Week 16"](#week16). However, I think the "best" way to quantize
gravity in 3 dimensions is the way involving Chern-Simons theory,
because this way is the most closely related to Ashtekar's approach to
quantizing gravity in 4 dimensions, hence it sheds the most light on the
things I'm interested in --- and I also think it's the most
beautiful. In this approach, you can compute a lot of things, and
basically what Carlip has done is to show that associated to the event
horizon there are degrees of freedom which should give entropy
proportional to its area.

I suppose I can't say how he does it much more clearly than he says it,
so I'll quote the introduction, taking the liberty of turning some of
his LaTeX into English. If you get scared by the "Virasoro operator
$L_0$" below, never fear --- in this context, it just amounts to the
angular momentum operator, which generates rotations about the origin.
So:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The basic argument is quite simple. Begin by considering general
relativity on a manifold $M$ with boundary. We ordinarily split the metric
into true physical excitations and "pure gauge" degrees of freedom
that can be removed by diffeomorphisms of $M$. But the presence of a
boundary alters the gauge invariance of general relativity: the
infinitesimal transformations [...] must now be restricted to those
generated by vector fields [...] with no component normal to the
boundary, that is, true diffeomorphisms that preserve the boundary of $M$.
As a consequence, some degrees of freedom that would naively be viewed
as "pure gauge" become dynamical, introducing new degrees of
freedom associated with the boundary.

Now, the event horizon of a black hole is not a true boundary, although
the black hole complementarity approach of Susskind et al. suggests that
it might be appropriately treated as such. Regardless of one's view of
that program, however, it is clear that in order to ask quantum
mechanical questions about the behavior of black holes, one must put in
"boundary conditions" that ensure that a black hole is present.
This means requiring the existence of a hypersurface with particular
metric properties---say, those of an apparent horizon.

The simplest way to do quantum mechanics in the presence of such a
surface is to quantize fields separately on each side, imposing the
appropriate correlations as boundary conditions. In a path integral
approach, for instance, one can integrate over fields on each side,
equate the boundary values, and finally integrate over those boundary
values compatible with the existence of a black hole. But this process
again introduces boundary terms that restrict the gauge invariance of
the theory, leading once more to the appearance of new degrees of
freedom at the horizon that would otherwise be treated as unphysical.

My suggestion is that black hole entropy is determined by counting these
would-be gauge degrees of freedom. The resulting picture is similar to
Maggiore's membrane model of the black hole horizon, but with a
particular derivation and interpretation of the "membrane" degrees
of freedom.

The analysis of this phenomenon is fairly simple in 2+1 dimensions. It
is well known that (2+1)-dimensional gravity can be written as a
Chern-Simons theory, and it is also a standard result that a
Chern-Simons theory on a manifold with boundary induces a dynamical
Wess-Zumino-Witten (WZW) theory on the boundary. In the presence of a
cosmological constant $\Lambda = -1/L^2$ appropriate for the
(2+1)-dimensional black hole, one obtains a slightly modified $\mathrm{SO}(2,1) \times \mathrm{SO}(2,1)$ WZW model, with coupling constant
$$k = \frac{L\sqrt{2}}{8G}$$
This model is not completely understood, but in the large $k$ --- i.e.,
small $\Lambda$ --- limit, it may be approximated by a theory of six
independent bosonic oscillators. I show below that the Virasoro operator
$L_0$ for this theory takes the form
$$L_0 \sim N -\left(\frac{r}{4G}\right)^2,$$
where $N$ is a number operator and $r$ is the horizon radius. It is a
standard result of string theory that the number of states of such a
system behaves asymptotically as
$$n(N) \sim \exp(\pi \sqrt{4} N)$$
If we demand that $L_0$ vanish --- physically, requiring states to be
independent of the choice of origin of the angular coordinate at the
horizon --- we thus obtain
$$\log n(r) \sim \frac{2 \pi r}{4G},$$
precisely the right expression for the entropy of the (2+1)-dimensional
black hole.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Also, Carlo Rovelli spoke about describing the dynamics of quantum
gravity coupled to a scalar field in terms of "spin network" states. I
think this was based on work he did in collaboration with Lee Smolin,
and I don't think it's out yet. I'm just about to finish up a little
paper on spin network states myself, since they seem like very useful
things in quantum gravity. The simplest sort of spin network is just a
trivalent graph (i.e., 3 edges adjacent to each vertex) with edges
labelled by "spins" $0,1/2,1,3/2,\ldots$, and satisfying the "triangle
inequality" at each vertex:
$$j_1 + j_2 \leqslant j_3, \quad j_2 + j_3 \leqslant j_1, \quad j_3 + j_1 \leqslant j_2,$$
where $j_1$, $j_2$, $j_3$ are the spins labelling the edges adjacent to the given
vertex. Really, the spins should be thought of as irreducible
representations of $\mathrm{SU}(2)$, and the triangle inequalities is necessary for
the representation $j_3$ to appear as a summand in the tensor product of
the representations $j_1$ and $j_2$. (If the last sentence was meaningless to
you, reading ["Week 5"](#week5) will help a little, though probably
not quite enough.)

Penrose introduced spin networks as part of a purely combinatorial
approach to spacetime in the paper:

2) "Angular momentum; an approach to combinatorial space time", by Roger Penrose, in _Quantum Theory and Beyond_, ed. T. Bastin, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1971.

It is somehow satisfying, therefore, to see that spin networks arise
naturally as a convenient description of states in the loop
representation of quantum gravity, which STARTS mainly with Einstein's
equations and the principles of quantum mechanics. Certainly there is a
lot more we need to learn about them.... One place worth reading about
them is:

3) "Conformal field theory, spin geometry, and quantum gravity", by Louis Crane, _Phys. Lett._ **B259** (1991), 243--248.

I will be coming out with a paper on them next week if I get my act
together, and I may say a bit more about them in future ["Week s"](#weeks).

Rovelli also mentioned an interesting paper he wrote about the problem
of time in quantum gravity with the operator-algebra/noncommutative-
geometry guru Alain Connes:

4) "Von Neumann algebra automorphisms and time-thermodynamics relation in general covariant quantum theories", by A. Connes and C. Rovelli, 25 pages in LaTex format available as [`gr-qc/9406019`](https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9406019).

The problem of time in quantum gravity is a bit tricky to describe,
since it takes different guises in different approaches to quantum
gravity, but I have attempted to give a rough introduction to it in
["Week 11"](#week11) and ["Week 27"](#week27). One way to get
a feeling for it is to realize that anything you are used to doing with
Hamiltonians in quantum mechanics or quantum field theory, you CAN'T do
in quantum gravity, at least not in any simple way, because there is no
Hamiltonian in general relativity, but only a "Hamiltonian
constraint" --- which in quantum gravity becomes the Wheeler-DeWitt
equation
$$H \psi = 0.$$
Now, people know there is a mystical relationship between time and
temperature that might be written
$$it = \frac{1}{kT}$$
where $t$ is time, $T$ is temperature, and $k$ is Boltzmann's constant. This
equation is a bit of an exaggeration! But the point is that in quantum
theory, when there is a Hamiltonian $H$ around one evolves states using
the operator
$$\exp(-itH)$$
while the Gibbs state, that is, the equilibrium state at temperature $T$,
is given by the density matrix
$$\exp(-H/kT).$$
It is this fact that relates statistical mechanics and quantum field
theory so closely.

Now, in quantum gravity things aren't so simple, since there isn't a
Hamiltonian (just a Hamiltonian constraint). However, people *do* know
that there are all sorts of funny relationships between statistical
mechanics and quantum gravity. For example, an accelerating observer in
Minkowski space will see the vacuum as a heat bath with temperature
proportional to her acceleration, so in curved spacetime, where there
are no truly inertial frames, there really is no well-defined notion of
a vacuum; in some vague sense, all there are is "thermal" states. This
fact is also somehow related to Hawking radiation, and to the notion of
black hole entropy... but really, there is a lot that nobody
understands about all these connections!

In any event, Rovelli was prompted to use thermodynamics to DEFINE time
in quantum gravity as follows. Given a mixed state with density matrix
$D$, *find* some operator $H$ such that $D$ is the Gibbs state $\exp(-H/kT)$. In lots of cases this isn't hard; it basically amounts to
$$H = -kT \ln D$$
Of course, $H$ will depend on $T$, but this really is just saying that
fixing your units of temperature fixes your units of time!

Operator theorists have pondered this notion very carefully for a long
time and generalized it into something called the Tomita-Takesaki
theorem, which Connes and Rovelli explain. This gives a very general way
to cook up a Hamiltonian (hence a notion of time evolution) from a state
of a quantum system! For example, one can use this trick to start with a
Robertson-Walker universe full of blackbody radiation, and recover a
notion of "time". This is very intriguing, and it may represent some
real progress in understanding the deep relations between time,
thermodynamics, and gravity. There are, of course, lots of problems and
puzzles to deal with.

Another intriguing talk at the conference was given by Viqar Husain, on
the subject of the following paper:

5) "The affine symmetry of self-dual gravity", by Viqar Husain, 17 pages in ReVTeX format available as [`hep-th/9410072`](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9410072).

Let me simply quote the abstract, since I don't feel I really
understand the essence of this business well enough to say anything
useful yet:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Self-dual gravity may be reformulated as the two dimensional chiral
model with the group of area preserving diffeomorphisms as its gauge
group. Using this formulation, it is shown that self-dual gravity
contains an infinite dimensional hidden symmetry algebra, which is the
Affine (Kac-Moody) algebra associated with the Lie algebra of area
preserving diffeomorphisms. This result provides an observable algebra
and a solution generating technique for self-dual gravity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A couple more things before I wrap this up.... First, in case any
mathematicians out there are wondering what this "knots and quantum
gravity" business is all about, here's something I wrote to review the
subject:

6) "Knots and Quantum Gravity: Progress and Prospects", John Baez, 22 pages in LaTeX format, available as [`gr-qc/9410018`](https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9410018).

My abstract:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Recent work on the loop representation of quantum gravity has revealed
previously unsuspected connections between knot theory and quantum
gravity, or more generally, $3$-dimensional topology and $4$-dimensional
generally covariant physics. We review how some of these relationships
arise from a 'ladder of field theories' including quantum gravity and
$BF$ theory in 4 dimensions, Chern-Simons theory in 3 dimensions, and the
$G/G$ gauged WZW model in 2 dimensions. We also describe the relation
between link (or multiloop) invariants and generalized measures on the
space of connections. In addition, we pose some research problems and
describe some new results, including a proof (due to Sawin) that the
Chern-Simons path integral is not given by a generalized measure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Finally, let me draw people's attention to "Matters of Gravity", the
newsletter Jorge Pullin puts together at considerable effort, to keep
people informed about general relativity and the like, experimental and
theoretical:

7) ""Matters of Gravity", a newsletter for the gravity community", Number **4**, edited by Jorge Pullin, 24 pages in Plain TeX, available as [`gr-qc/9409004`](https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9409004), or from WWW by `http://vishnu.nirvana.phys.psu.edu/`

Here's the table of contents of this issue:

- Editorial.
- Gravity News:
    + Report on the APS topical group in gravitation, Beverly Berger.
- Research briefs:
    + Gravitational microlensing and the search for dark matter, Bohdan Paczynski.
    + Laboratory gravity: the G mystery, Riley Newman.
    + LIGO project update, Stan Whitcomb.
- Conference Reports
    + PASCOS '94, Peter Saulson.
    + The Vienna Meeting, P. Aichelburg, R. Beig.
    + The Pitt binary black hole grand challenge meeting, Jeff Winicour.
    + International symposium on experimental gravitation at Pakistan, Munawar Karim.
    + 10th Pacific coast gravity meeting, Jim Isenberg.
