# November 3, 1998 {#week125}

Last week I promised to explain some mysterious connections between
elliptic curves, string theory, and the number 24. I claimed that it all
boils down to the fact that there are two especially symmetric lattices
in the plane, namely the square lattice:
$$
  \begin{tikzpicture}[scale=0.7]
    \draw[->] (-3,0) to (4,0) node[label=below:{$\Re(z)$}]{};
    \draw[->] (0,-3) to (0,4) node[label=left:{$\Im(z)$}]{};
    \foreach \m in {-1,0,1,2}
    {
      \foreach \n in {-1,0,1,2}
      {
        \node at ({1.5*\m},{1.6*\n}) {$\bullet$};
      }
    }
  \end{tikzpicture}
$$
with 4-fold symmetry, and the hexagonal lattice:
$$
  \begin{tikzpicture}[scale=0.7]
    \draw[->] (-3,0) to (4,0) node[label=below:{$\Re(z)$}]{};
    \draw[->] (0,-3) to (0,4) node[label=left:{$\Im(z)$}]{};
    \foreach \m in {-1,0,1,2}
    {
      \foreach \n in {-1,0,1,2}
      {
        \node at ({1.5*\m+0.75*\n-0.5},{1.33*\n-0.5}) {$\bullet$};
      }
    }
  \end{tikzpicture}
$$
with 6-fold symmetry. Now it's time for me to start backing up those
claims.

First I need to talk a bit about lattices and $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z})$. As I explained in
["Week 66"](#week66), a lattice in the complex plane consists of
all points that are integer linear combinations of two complex numbers,
say \omega_1 and \omega_2. However, we can change these numbers without changing
the lattice by letting

                     \omega'1 = a \omega1 + b \omega2

                     \omega'2 = c \omega1 + d \omega2

where

                              a   b 

                              c   d

is a 2×2 invertible matrix of integers whose inverse again consists of
integers. Usually it's good to require that our transformation preserve
the handedness of the basis (\omega_1, \omega_2), which means that this matrix
should have determinant $1$. Such matrices form a group called \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}). In
the context of elliptic curves it's also called the "modular group".

Now associated to the square lattice is a special element of \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z})
that corresponds to a 90 degree rotation. Everyone calls it S:

                             0  -1
                       S =
                             1   0

Associated to the hexagonal lattice is a special element of \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) that
corresponds to a 60 degree rotation. Everyone calls it ST:

                             0  -1
                      ST =
                             1   1

(See, there's a matrix they already call T, and ST is the product of S
and that one.) Now, you may complain that the matrix ST doesn't look
like a rotation, but you have to be careful! What I mean is, if you take
the hexagonal lattice and pick a basis for it like this:

                         \omega2      
                    *       *      *      *

                                     \omega1
                        *      0*      *                


                    *       *      *      *

then in *this* basis the matrix ST represents a 60 degree rotation.

So far this is pretty straightforward, but now come some surprises.
First, it turns out that \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) is *generated* by S and ST. In other
words, every 2×2 integer matrix with determinant $1$ can be written as a
product of a bunch of copies of S, ST, and their inverses. Second, all
the relations satisfied by S and ST follow from these obvious ones:

S^4 = 1

(ST)^6^ = 1

together with

S^2 = (ST)^3

which holds because both sides describe a 180 degree rotation.

Right away this implies that \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) has a certain inherent "12-ness"
to it. Let me explain. \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) is a nonabelian group - this is how
someone with a Ph.D. says that matrix multiplication doesn't commute ---
but suppose we abelianize it by imposing extra relations *forcing*
commutativity. Then we get a group generated by S and ST, satisfying the
above relations together with an extra one saying that S and ST commute.
This is the group Z/12, which has 12 elements!

This "12-ness" has a lot to do with the magic properties of the number
24 in string theory. But to see how this "12-ness" affects string
theory, we need to talk about elliptic curves a bit more. It will take
forever unless I raise the mathematical sophistication level a little.
So....

We can define an elliptic curve to be a torus C/L formed by taking the
complex plane C and modding out by a lattice L. Since C is an abelian
group and L is a subgroup, this torus is an abelian group, but in the
theory of elliptic curves we consider it not just as a group but also as
a complex manifold. Thus two elliptic curves C/L and C/L' are
considered isomorphic if there is a complex-analytic function from one
to the other that's also an isomorphism of groups. This happens
precisely when there is a nonzero number z such that zL = L', or in
other words, whenever L' is a rotated and/or dilated version of L.

There's a wonderful space called the "moduli space" of elliptic
curves: each point on it corresponds to an isomorphism class of elliptic
curves. In physics, we think of each point in it as describing the
geometry of a torus-shaped string worldsheet. Thus in the path-integral
approach to string theory we need to integrate over this space, together
with a bunch of other moduli spaces corresponding to string worldsheets
with different topologies. All these moduli spaces are important and
interesting, but the moduli space of elliptic curves is a nice simple
example when you're first trying to learn this stuff. What does this
space look like?

Well, suppose we have an elliptic curve C/L. We can take our lattice L
and describe it in terms of a right-handed basis (\omega_1, \omega_2). For the
purposes of classifying the describing the elliptic curve up to
isomorphism, it doesn't matter if we multiply these basis elements by
some number z, so all that really matters is the ratio

                           \tau = \omega1/\omega2.

Since our basis was righthanded, \tau lives in the upper halfplane, which
people like to call H.

Okay, so now we have described our elliptic curve in terms of a complex
number \tau lying in H. But the problem is, we could have chosen a
different right-handed basis for our lattice L and gotten a different
number \tau. We've got to think about that. Luckily, we've already seen
how we can change bases without changing the lattice: we just apply a
matrix in \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}), getting a new basis

                     \omega'1 = a \omega1 + b \omega2

                     \omega'2 = c \omega1 + d \omega2

This has the effect of changing \tau to

                    \tau' = (a \tau + b)/(c \tau + d).

If you don't see why, figure it out - you've gotta understand this to
understand elliptic curves!

Anyway, two numbers \tau and \tau' describe isomorphic elliptic curves if and
only if they differ by the above sort of transformation. So we've
figured out the moduli space of elliptic curves: it's the quotient
space H/\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}), where \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) acts on H as above!

Now, the quotient space H/\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) is not a smooth manifold, because
while the upper halfplane H is a manifold and the group \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) is
discrete, the action of \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) on H is not free: i.e., certain points
in H don't move when you hit them with certain elements of \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}).

If you don't see why this causes trouble, think about a simpler
example, like the group G = Z/n acting as rotations of the complex
plane, C. Most points in the plane move when you rotate them, but the
origin doesn't. The quotient space C/G is a cone with its tip
corresponding to the origin. It's smooth everywhere except the tip,
where it has a "conical singularity". The moral of the story is that
when we mod out a manifold by a group of symmetries, we get a space with
singularities corresponding to especially symmetrical points in the
original manifold.

So we expect that H/\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) has singularities corresponding to points in
H corresponding to especially symmetrical lattices. These, of course,
are our friends the square and hexagonal lattices!

But let's be a bit more careful. First of all, *nothing* in H moves
when you hit it with the matrix -1. But that's no big deal: we can just
replace the group \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) by

                            \mathrm{PSL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) = \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z})/{±1}

Since -1 doesn't move *any* points of H, the action of \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) on H
gives an action of \mathrm{PSL}(2,\mathbb{Z}), and the moduli space of elliptic curves is
H/\mathrm{PSL}(2,\mathbb{Z}).

Now most points in H aren't preserved by any element of \mathrm{PSL}(2,\mathbb{Z}).
However, certain points are! The point

                                \tau = i

corresponding to the square lattice, is preserved by S and all its
powers. And the point

                             \tau = exp(2\pii/3)

corresponding to the hexagonal lattice, is preserved by ST and all its
powers. These give rise to two conical singularities in the moduli space
of elliptic curves. Away from these points, the moduli space is smooth.

Lest you get the wrong impression, I should hasten to reassure you that
the moduli space is not all that complicated: it looks almost like the
complex plane! There's a famous one-to-one and onto function from the
moduli space to the complex plane: it's called the "modular function"
and denoted by j. So the moduli space is *topologically* just like the
complex plane; the only difference is that it fails to be *smooth* at
two points, where there are conical singularities.

This may seem a bit hard to visualize, but it's actually not too hard.
Here's one way. Start with the region in the upper halfplane outside
the unit circle and between the vertical lines x = -1/2 and x = 1/2. It
looks sort of like this:

                       .....................
                       .....................
                       .....................
                       .....................
                       .....................   
                       .....................
                       .....................               
                       .....................         
                       ..........A..........
                       .....           .....
                       ...               ...
                       .                   .
                       B                   B'

Then glue the vertical line starting at B to the one starting at B',
and glue the arc AB to the arc AB'. We get a space that's smooth
everywhere except at the points A and B = B', where there are conical
singularities. The total angle around the point A is just 180 degrees ---
half what it would be if the moduli space were smooth there. The total
angle around B is just 120 degrees - one third what it would be if the
moduli space were smooth there.

The reason this works is that the region shown above is a "fundamental
domain" for the action of \mathrm{PSL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) on H. In other words, every elliptic
curve is isomorphic to one where the parameter \tau lies in this region.
The point A is where \tau = i, and the point B is where \tau = exp(2\pii/3).

Now let's see where the "12-ness" comes into this picture. Minhyong
Kim explained this to me in a very nice way, but to tell you what he
said, I'll have to turn up the level of mathematical sophistication
another notch. (Needless to say, all the errors will be mine.)

So, I'll assume you know what a "complex line bundle" is - this is
just another name for a 1-dimensional complex vector bundle. Locally a
section of a complex line bundle looks a lot like a complex-valued
function, but this isn't true globally unless your line bundle is
trivial. If you aren't careful, sometimes you may *think* you have a
function defined on a space, only to discover later that it's actually
a section of a line bundle. This sort of thing happens all the time in
physics. In string theory, when you're doing path integrals on moduli
space, you have to make sure that what you're integrating is really a
function! So it's important to understand all the line bundles on
moduli space.

Now, given any sort of space, we can form the set of all isomorphism
classes of line bundles over this space. This is actually an abelian
group, since when we tensor two line bundles we get another line bundle,
and when you tensor any line bundle with its dual, you get the trivial
line bundle, which plays the role of the multiplicative identity for
tensor products. This group is called the "Picard group" of your
space.

What's the Picard group of the moduli space of elliptic curves? Well,
when I said "any sort of space" I was hinting that there are all sorts
of spaces - topological spaces, smooth manifolds, algebraic varieties,
and so on - each one of which comes with its own particular notion of
line bundle. Thus, before studying the Picard group of moduli space we
need to decide what context we're going to work in! As a mere
*topological space*, we've seen that the moduli space of elliptic
curves is indistinguishable from the plane, and every *topological* line
bundle over the plane is trivial, so in *this* context the Picard group
is the trivial group - boring!

But the moduli space is actually much more than a mere topological
space. It's not a smooth manifold, but it's awfully close: it's the
quotient of the smooth manifold H by the discrete group \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}), and its
singularities are pretty mild in nature.

Somehow we should take advantage of this when defining the Picard group
of the moduli space. One way to do so involves the theory of "stacks".
Without getting into the details of this theory, let me just vaguely
sketch what it does for us here. For a much more careful treatment, with
more of an algebraic geometry flavor, try:

1) David Mumford, Picard groups of moduli problems, in Arithmetical
Algebraic Geometry, ed. O. F. G. Schilling, Harper and Row, New York,
1965.

Suppose a discrete group G acts on a smooth manifold X. A
"G-equivariant" line bundle on X is a line bundle equipped with an
action of G that gets along with the action of G on X. If G acts freely
on X, a line bundle on X/G is the same as a G-equivariant line bundle on
X. This isn't true when the action of G on X isn't free. But we can
still go ahead and *define* the Picard group of X/G to be the group of
isomorphism classes of G-equivariant line bundles on X. Of course we
should say something to let people know that we're using this funny
definition. In our example, people call it the Picard group of the
moduli *stack* of elliptic curves.

So what's this group, anyway?

Well, it turns out that you can get any \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z})-equivariant line bundle
on H, up to isomorphism, by taking the trivial line bundle on H and
using a 1-dimensional representation of \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}) to say how it acts on
the fiber. So we just need to understand 1-dimensional representations
of \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z}). The set of isomorphism classes of these forms a group under
tensor product, and this is the group we're after.

Well, a 1-dimensional representation of a group always factors through
the abelianization of that group. We saw the abelianization of \mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{Z})
was Z/12. But everyone knows that the group of 1-dimensional
representations of Z/n is again Z/n - this is called Pontryagin duality.
So: the Picard group of the moduli stack of elliptic curves is Z/12.

So we see again an inherent "12-ness" built into the theory of
elliptic curves! You may be wondering how this makes the number 24 so
important in string theory. In particular, where does that extra factor
of 2 come from? I'll say a little more about this next Week. I may or
may not manage to tie together the loose ends!

You may also be wondering about "stacks". In this you're not alone.
There's an amusing passage about stacks in the following book:

2) Joe Harris and Ian Morrison, Moduli of Curves, Springer-Verlag, New
York, 1998.

They write:

> "Of course, here I'm working with the moduli stack rather than with
> the moduli space. For those of you who aren't familiar with stacks,
> don't worry: basically, all it means is that I'm allowed to pretend
> that the moduli space is smooth and that there's a universal family
> over it."
>
> Who hasn't heard these words, or their equivalent, spoken in a talk?
> And who hasn't fantasized about grabbing the speaker by the lapels
> and shaking him until he says what - exactly - he means by them? But
> perhaps you're now thinking that all that is in the past, and that at
> long last you're going to learn what a stack is and what they do.
>
> Fat chance.

Actually Mumford's paper cited above gives a nice introduction to the
theory of stacks without mentioning the dreaded word "stack".
Alternatively, you can wait and read this book when it comes out:

3) K. Behrend, L. Fantechi, W. Fulton, L. Goettsche and A. Kresch, An
Introduction to Stacks, in preparation.

But let me just briefly say a bit about stacks and the moduli stack of
elliptic curves in particular. A stack is a weak sheaf of categories.
For this to make sense you must already know what a sheaf is! In the
simplest case, a sheaf over a topological space, the sheaf S gives you a
set S(U) for each open set U, and gives you a function S(U,V): S(U)\to
S(V) whenever the open set U is contained in the open set V. These
functions must satisfy some laws. The notion of "stack" is just a
categorification of this idea. That is, a stack S over a topological
space gives you a *category* S(U) for each open set U, and gives you a
*functor* S(U,V): S(U)\to S(V). These functors satisfy the same laws as
before, but *only up to specified natural isomorphism*. And these
natural isomorphisms must in turn satisfy some new laws of their own,
so-called coherence laws.

In the case at hand there's a stack over the moduli space of elliptic
curves. For any open set U in the moduli space, an object of S(U) is a
family of elliptic curves over U, such that each elliptic curve in the
family sits over the point in moduli space corresponding to its
isomorphism class. Similarly, a morphism in S(U) is a family of
isomorphisms of elliptic curves. This allows us to keep track of the
fact that some elliptic curves have more automorphisms than others! And
it takes care of the funny stuff that happens at the singular points in
the moduli space.

By the way, this watered-down summary leaves out a lot of the algebraic
geometry that you usually see when people talk about stacks.

Finally, one more thing - it looks like Kreimer and company are making
great progress on understanding renormalization in a truly elegant way.

4) D. J. Broadhurst and D. Kreimer, Renormalization automated by Hopf
algebra, preprint available as
[`hep-th/9810087`](http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/9810087).

Let me quote the abstract:

> It was recently shown that the renormalization of quantum field theory
> is organized by the Hopf algebra of decorated rooted trees, whose
> coproduct identifies the divergences requiring subtraction and whose
> antipode achieves this. We automate this process in a few lines of
> recursive symbolic code, which deliver a finite renormalized
> expression for any Feynman diagram. We thus verify a representation of
> the operator product expansion, which generalizes Chen's lemma for
> iterated integrals. The subset of diagrams whose forest structure
> entails a unique primitive subdivergence provides a representation of
> the Hopf algebra H~R~ of undecorated rooted trees. Our undecorated
> Hopf algebra program is designed to process the 24,213,878 BPHZ
> contributions to the renormalization of 7,813 diagrams, with up to 12
> loops. We consider 10 models, each in 9 renormalization schemes. The
> two simplest models reveal a notable feature of the subalgebra of
> Connes and Moscovici, corresponding to the commutative part of the
> Hopf algebra H~T~ of the diffeomorphism group: it assigns to Feynman
> diagrams those weights which remove ζ values from the counterterms of
> the minimal subtraction scheme. We devise a fast algorithm for these
> weights, whose squares are summed with a permutation factor, to give
> rational counterterms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
